without further waffling let's get
started so in this lesson we're going to
look at IELTS general writing task 1 and
specifically we're going to look at the
formal letter though I must say there
isn't really much difference between
formal semi formal and informal a little
bit of vocabulary and grammar a very
very small part maybe maybe 2 percent of
your vocabulary and grammar will change
but apart from that the structures the
same the language is basically 98
percent the same so let's have a look at
the formal letter first cool so imagine
you sit down on test day and this is
what you see in front of you and it says
task 1 you should spend about 20 minutes
on this task fine so you got 20 minutes
so you'd better act fast let's read the
scenario because this outlines the
scenario for the letter gives you the
background information that you need it
says you live in a room in college which
you share with another student however
there are many problems with this
arrangement and you find it very
difficult to work write a letter to the
accommodation officer at the college in
the letter describe the situation
explain your problems and why it is
difficult to work say what kind of
accommodation you would prefer write 150
words what we can see here really are
two things a background scenario that
paints a picture of what's happening
right because all of a sudden you're a
college student and you're complaining
about your accommodation and you see
three bullet points these are critical
and this is what we're going to look at
but before we do that I want to show you
my letter this is what your letter
should look like this is what would get
you an alt 9 or at least this deserves
to get an IELTS 9 sometimes I also
really strict with their writing
sometimes I see really really good
quality writing get poor scores and I
think to myself
maybe the I answers a little bit unfair
with its writing but anyway take a close
look at this one and I'm going to walk
you through it and tell you why this
would get nails 9
let me just read it to you quickly this
is 156 words this is a top letter dear
Sarah madam
I'm writing to let you know that I am
unhappy with my current living
conditions while the accommodation
itself is fine my housemate has become
intolerable making it almost impossible
for me to work I hope you will consider
my situation favorably so I have nailed
paragraph 1 that first bullet point
paragraph 1 borne done paragraph 2 let
me explain my situation the trouble
started about 3 months ago when my
housemate first moved in prior to that
everything was fine my old housemate was
extremely considerate a current
housemaid however stays up almost all
night and plays incessantly loud music
as such I have not been able to sleep
properly and therefore cannot
concentrate on my studies
that's bullet point bullet point -
that's my second paragraph let's look at
the third would you kindly transfer me
or my housemate to another room I would
much prefer to live with someone who is
quieter and more considerate of others
as long as it is quiet
I don't mind with whom I live with thank
you for your consideration yours
faithfully Jai cool right why would this
get an IELTS 9 well there are specific
there are four specific criteria that
the examiners look for in other words
what I mean by criterias the examiners
have a scoring system right so they get
your essay or they get your writing task
1 and they have a scoring system and
they tick boxes and they say okay you
know I'll two nine eight seven six five
four okay here here here and there are
four things that they look at okay only
four there are four things they look at
they're really important first one is
you write on topic and you must keep to
the topic if you start writing about
something else and you don't follow
those bullet points you're in trouble
to use precise vocabulary three use
accurate grammar for use a logical
structure let's have a look first a
topic so topic is this topic writing on
topic means that you do not deviate from
this prompt specifically what it means
is that you have understood this you've
understood the scenario you have
described the situation you've explained
your problems and why it's difficult to
work and you've said what kind of
accommodation you would prefer now of
course this becomes paragraph 1 this is
paragraph 2 this is paragraph 3 what's
really important is you do not blend
your paragraphs together that's a hard
thing to do you need to keep them
separate right you want to just make
sure that this paragraph is very
separate from this paragraph and very
separate from this paragraph etc so
let's have a look at mine well if we
look closely we can see paragraph 1 I
described a situation paragraph 2 I
explained the problems and difficulties
in more detail paragraph 3 I asked for
different accommodation in other words
what have I done I have done all three
of these describe explain and say
describe explain and I've asked for
different accommodation the second thing
you need to be able to do is use precise
vocabulary let's have a look at my
vocabulary in this letter I want to
point out to you what that means
precisely you just don't leave me yet
we're actually going to write a letter
I'm going to get you to write a letter
sentence by sentence but just bear with
me while I explain why what you need to
do to get that high score it's very
confusing so let me explain then we'll
do it together and we'll write one so
get your pen out we're just about to
start let me just explain this a bit
more so vocabulary well first of all
there are phrases that you
need to memorize for example I am
writing to let you know that blah
so vocabulary is not necessarily just
single words vocabulary can be a phrase
of say five words or it can be
collocation like pairs of words that
come together let me show you some more
so conditions this is a nice work nice
intolerable beautiful adjectives what
about this one we've got almost
impossible well that's a phrase or a
collocation of two words what about this
phrase consider my situation favorably
the trouble started prior to that
however extremely considerate plays
incessantly loud music transfer there's
just a single verb and it's a nice one
quieter more considerate these are
adjectives right but there's special
types of adjectives this one I don't
mind phrase consideration just a good
word so you want to use a variety of you
know good when you choose your words
only use words that you are a hundred
percent sure of don't use a word that
you think are that sounds good but I'm
not quite sure of the meaning yes I'll
put it in don't do that because if it's
wrong if it's semantically wrong if the
meaning is different than what you think
it's but it's a bad thing to do you're
better off using a simple word that
you're sure of the meaning in other
words word choice is critical choosing
words that are precise is what this is
all about but as I said it's not just
about single words it's about phrases
it's about two words that come together
like almost impossible or extremely
considerate right what else we're going
to look at we're going to look at
grammar because to be honest this is
probably the hardest thing about the
English language especially written
English language use accurate grammar
first thing we're going to look at other
verbs in my letter I want to show you
the verbs so let's let's have a look at
these verbs right verb so every sentence
has a verb this one says let you know
well it's a verb phrase am present has
become present perfect is present hope
present explain present started what's
this one past moved in what that's a
verb plus a preposition that's a phrasal
verb was was stays up phrasal verb in
the present have not been able now what
is that that's like a present perfect
crazy verb present concentrate would so
we've got a modal verb would you
transfer me would you prefer ears here
we've got a negative do not mind live
thang call so we have a variety of verbs
here we've got we use present simple we
use some past simple we use some present
perfect now it's not about using a
variety of verbs just to show off and
say I can use this one this one this one
this one no again it's about using
grammar to be precise in terms of
meaning it's about selecting the present
simple verb because that's the verb that
expresses time as you want it to be
expressed or the present perfect to
express time as you want it to be
expressed or perhaps you're describing
something that happened in the past and
finished in the past so you will use
past simple so you don't just choose
willy-nilly verbs you choose to be
specific to be precise cool let me show
you some more voc grammar here let's
look at articles and nouns because this
is seems to be just a absolute killer
for people so here we've got the word
out let's look at this one here
conditions conditions plural here we've
got the accommodation so we've used the
article that because we're talking about
specific accommodation housemates
singular situations singular situation
the trouble specific trouble so we must
use this article months
why months ah three more than one three
months ago housemate fine housemate fine
music fine Studies plural night
housemate room others plural
consideration so the big killer with
nouns of course are two things one that
you can identify when the noun requires
the S is it one dog or two dogs is it
what's what what did I use condition or
conditions the other thing is to
consider our articles is it the
accommodation because we're talking
about specific known accommodation are
we talking about an accommodation
or just accommodation in general have to
be precise with your article use adverbs
and adjectives when getting there hold
with me I want to show you this I want
to show you this here's a beautiful
adjective unhappy living conditions this
is actually an adjective
intolerable great fine impossible
considerate fine all love another quiet
term more considerate quiet excellent
and what about these adverbs here well
we've got the almost impossible we've
got favorably we've got extremely
considerate incessantly loud sleep
properly almost all night and kindly
transfer min fine oh what's going on
here what I knew it was going to do that
let me bring it back prepositions just
quickly let's look at the prepositions
so you're unhappy with it's impossible
for the trouble started about three
months ago moved in prior to stays up
concentrate on live with live with thank
you for these little words with to in on
etc
these are critical for precision you
have to get your prepositions exactly
right if you choose the wrong one then
it just sounds a little bit odd it just
sounds a little bit strange finally I
want to show you sentences so when you
write your letter to get a nine to get a
nine you have to write a mixture of
simple short sentences and complex
longer sentences this is what the
examiners look for in the letter so they
can sort of see they can see the length
of your sentences and they can also see
words that coordinate or connect
sentences together like because or that
or which or where you know how you're
writing a simple sentence like
subject-verb-object and you put aware
and they can put another one next to it
and you can plug them together to make a
complex sentence so you want complex
sentences but if you're not confident
with your grammar then stick to short
sentences much better to be clearer than
complex and unclear simple clarity beats
complex unclarity doesn't make sense but
you know what I mean so you can see that
my sentences are most of them along most
of them along a couple of short ones but
most of them are complex so this is an
IELTS night last thing I want to show
you and this is where we're about to
move into you writing your letter I want
to show you how to use a logical
structure because one of the things that
you can do to make your test day a lot
easier and to help you a lot is to learn
a logical structure learn a struck
memorize a structure so when you walk in
on test day you have in your mind a
cheat sheet it's kind of like a cheat
sheet but you're not cheating you're
just being smart because you've
memorized a very good structure so let's
have a look at my structure here let me
just get out my red pen again so I've
got the greeting fine that's easy you
just memorize that line memorize okay
now we move into the paragraphs
so reason this is paragraph one fine I
can't really memorize this paragraph two
fine this is straight from those bullet
points those dot points paragraph three
fine ending fine this we just memorize
sign are fine we just memorize and your
name of course you just memorize so
there we go got those three so really
the greeting you memorize their ending
you memorize sign off a name you just
memorize you have to just write three
paragraphs in effect you're just writing
three paragraphs now what you can do and
what I want to show you today is how to
memorize the first phrase of each
paragraph because each paragraph will
always be the same in IELTS writing task
1 the first one will always give a
reason so therefore you can memorize
this I am writing to let you know that
something the second one will always be
an explanation so you can always start
with this let me explain my situation
the third one the third paragraph will
always be a request or a suggestion and
so you can always use this phrase here
memorize this would you kindly and then
you just add whatever verb you want
there would you kindly give would you
kindly send would you kindly drive me to
the airport whatever it is so what are
we memorizing well we're memorizing
we're memorizing this we're memorizing
this phrase up to here memorizing this
phrase up to here memorizing this phrase
up to here we're memorizing this entire
ending we're memorizing the sign off and
of course you memorize your own name so
in fact all we have to write is this
part here this part here this part here
cool that's that's where it starts to
get tricky so
let's start I think you're ready now to
a begin writing so get out your pen and
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
show you sort of sentence by sentence
how to write this I'm going to show you
what I wrote and then you're going to
sort of copy I want you to copy what I
write because obviously my letters good
I'm in native English teacher I've taken
the IELTS so I'll show you I'll show you
exactly what to do so on test day you
sit down you look at the question prompt
okay you know you don't really need to
read this stuff you know spend 20
minutes fine write 150 words fine but
you really need to understand the
scenario so let's read this again says
you live in a room in college which you
share with another student however there
are many problems with this arrangement
ie living with the other student and you
find it very difficult to work write a
letter to the accommodation officer at
the college in the letter this is your
paragraph one paragraph 2 paragraph 3
describe the situation explain your
problems why it's difficult to work say
what kind of accommodation you would
prefer course don't blend your
paragraphs this is really important you
want to keep them very separate from
each other
keep them separate fine
so that's it paragraph one two three
paragraph one give reason for writing
paragraph two explain in detail
paragraph three request or suggest this
is what your letter is going to look
like from all of the starts of the
sentences these are the bits that we
memorize so you might want to pause this
video and write this down because you
can use this for every single writing
task one letter that you have to write
how to write the greeting dear sir/madam
that's easy how do we know that because
if you look down here it tells you how
to start your letter dear sir/madam
capital S capital M comma I want you to
write now into the chat dear sir or
madam exactly like this let's write this
letter from beginning to end you have 30
seconds
too easy too easy too easy right
paragraph one paragraph one now we have
to start to use our language we have to
use our we have to use our creativity
because we have to imagine we have to
imagine what it's like to be living in
college and to be unhappy with your
accommodation so we're gonna have to use
that scenario but now what we need to do
is we need to describe the situation
we're going to describe the situation
but we're going to describe it in
general very general because if you see
in the second paragraph the second one
here this is where we go into detail so
this one is detail right this one is
general this is just a general
description of the situation then we go
into the detailed problems don't start
getting into details here this is not
for detail this is just general
description really how you can think of
this as your reason for writing why are
you writing this letter so I'm writing
to let you know that I we're going to
use this phrase I want you to copy this
exactly so this is what I wrote so read
this I'm going to read this to you then
I want you to sort of copy it to write
your own okay so I'm going to so I'm
giving the reason for writing I'm
describing the situation I'm keeping it
general and I'm going to use this phrase
I'm writing to let you know that I so
this is mine I'm writing to let you know
that I am unhappy with my current living
conditions while the accommodation
itself is fine my house made has become
intolerable making it almost impossible
for me to work I hope you will consider
my situation favorably that's what I
wrote okay now I want you to write yours
but don't get into specifics you're
describing a general situation you're
not yet talking about specific
problems you have three minutes to write
your answer describing the situation
your living conditions you have three
minutes starting now
one minute left you're describing the
situation in general not going into
specifics you're not talking about
specific issues you're just sort of
introducing the situation and you're
beginning by the paragraph by writing
I'm writing to let you know that I blah
blah blah
thirty seconds
if you're on YouTube type your sentence
into the comments below don't forget to
click like please click like I love it
when you click like and subscribe if you
want three minutes is up cool if you
haven't finished that's cool you can go
back you can pause it and finish your
first paragraph there but that's
probably enough time let's let's have a
look at what we're doing next we're
going to write paragraph two we're going
to write paragraph two we've written
paragraph one where we gave a reason
gave the reason for writing we gave the
read the general reason for writing
paragraph two we're going to get into
some specifics we're going to start to
describe some details we're going to
explain your problems okay so we need to
get into the specifics here or should I
call this our details details details
yes and why it's difficult to work so
there are two things here we're going to
give some details and we're also going
to explain why it's difficult to work
okay this is what we're going to do in
paragraph 2 paragraph 2 its explanation
so explain in detail let's have a look
I'm going to read your mind ok and I
want you to use look at this phrase here
let me explain my situation I want
everybody to use this same phrase let me
explain my situation the trouble started
about three months ago when my housemate
first moved in prior to that everything
was fine my old housemate was extremely
considerate my current house maid
however stays up almost all night and
plays incessantly loud music as such I
have not been able to sleep properly and
therefore cannot concentrate on my
studies so what have I done here well
well one of the problems the problems
are my current housemate stays up almost
all night and plays incessantly loud
music okay so I've got two problems I've
got problem one here and I've got
problem 2 here great because it's said
here problems
now why is it difficult to work what
does that do to me well as such I have
not been able to sleep properly and I
therefore cannot concentrate I cannot
concentrate on my studies in other words
that's why it's difficult to work cool
your turn
I want to write your answer will give
you three minutes to get into the
details to explain the problem or the
problems and why it's difficult to work
your three minutes starts now
30 seconds left 30 seconds left
I just sort of realized that three
minutes is way too short to write these
paragraphs if you you're supposed to
spend about 20 minutes on this letter
now if you memorize the greeting the
sign off the ending and your name etc
and you memorize those first phrases of
the paragraphs then you should be able
to spend about five minutes on those
three paragraphs on each paragraph
rather so five minutes first one five
minute second five minutes though that's
15 minutes then sort of five minutes to
to read the question five minutes to
write the greeting except around
sign-off and that will equal about
twenty minutes so in the IELTS spend
about five minutes on each paragraph
I've left it too short here but you can
go back press pause and finish your
paragraph cool
all right let's let's let's keep going
how to write paragraph three well what's
paragraph three about this is where we
request so here it says say what kind of
accommodation you would prefer say what
kind of accommodation you would prefer
really what we're doing here is we're
requesting something we're requesting
something we're requesting something
sometimes it's either going to be two
things in the IELTS writing task one
you're either going to request like here
or perhaps perhaps you're going to
suggest which is a little bit different
so you might request where you might
suggest so yes let's have a look here so
requesting or suggesting fine all right
what's going on I think what's going on
why can't I skip to the next slide there
we go so how do we request well there's
a certain phrase in English where we say
and this is very formal very polite
would you kindly would you kindly would
you kindly and then we put any verb here
we put any very
you like like would you kindly pay for
my lunch or would you kindly bring me a
drink or would you kindly turn off the
TV okay this is a request and this is
just a verb that you just you fit in
here but this you just memorize would
you kindly okay so let's have a look at
mine it says would you kindly transfer
me all my housemate to another room I
would much prefer to live with someone
who is quieter and more considerate of
others as long as it is quiet
I don't mind whom I live with so say
what type of accommodation you would
prefer I've just said I don't really
care what type of accommodation as long
as it's quiet so that's fine I have
answered the question they obviously
have taken that question manipulated it
a bit cool so now I want you to request
say what type of accommodation you would
prefer use this phrase here write your
answer and give you three minutes but
again you can pause it come back and
spend five minutes
one more minutes
thirty seconds
cool that was three minutes feel free to
spend another couple of minutes on this
paragraph as I said five minutes per
paragraph is a good idea and then
another five minutes just to write the
introduction and the greeting and
whatnot and to read the question cool
all right
so we're up to the final part now we've
done the most difficult part now all we
need to do is write the ending sign-off
and your name that's it and this is
simple this is
we just memorize this it's it's very
straightforward you can just if you're
requesting something just memorize this
word-for-word thank you for your
consideration okay
memorize that phrase . it's perfect that
is perfect English
thank you for your consideration
memorize this yours faithfully comma and
then just put your name remember to put
a capital letter okay thank you for
consideration yours faithfully Tom Mary
whatever your name is
that's it that's it so memorize this
that's the last part of your letter
that's the ending the sign off in your
name so copy this into the chat or the
comments below word for word
same punctuation you have 30 seconds
cool all right done
you've just written an IELTS writing
task one formal letter and well it
depends depends on vocabulary and
grammar but the structures excellent the
formatting is perfect everything's good
one thing I'll say too if you're not
confident with your grammar if you're
not confident with your vocabulary if
you feel like you need some help
check out eetu language comm let me just
write it on the screen because what we
do is we offer feedback we offer
feedback go to this website whoops
that's a W let me start again
w WWE - language comm check that out
what we do is we offer tutorials
one-on-one tutorials with the teacher
you'll sit down with the teacher on
zoom' which is this platform like Skype
one-on-one on the computer right and the
teacher will have your essay and screen
share with you and go through with you
and tell you what you're doing wrong and
tell you how to do it right it's the
fastest way to improve we also offer
written feedback so you submit your
essays through the online course the
teacher receives them gives you written
feedback and sends them back to you
tells you what you're doing wrong and
what you're doing right but more
importantly what you're doing wrong so
you can improve so we have courses that
include tutorials written feedback we do
speaking tutorials we've got all of the
practice questions everything you need
at this website here e to language comm
so check that out if you're worried if
you need help all right
what you did that let's recap let's
recap let's think about what we learned
in this lesson
so we looked at this this is the
structure that you want to use for your
letter
you're never greeting paragraph one two
and three you would have an ending a
sign-off and a name of course you can
just memorize the greeting ending
sign-off a name
as we just saw this only takes 30
seconds to write 30 seconds that takes
10 seconds to write your paragraph 1
will be the reason for writing paragraph
2 is the explanation more details and
paragraph 3 is the request really these
are the things that you want to remove
that you want to memorize you want to
memorize the greeting you want to
memorize the first phrase of the reason
for writing you want to memorize this
sentence you want to memorize this
phrase this sentence this phrase and
well hopefully you don't have to
memorize your name hopefully know that
already but this all of this here is
about I don't know what this would be
about this would be about 25% of your
letter memorized the rest of it goes
here and this is where you need to just
watch your grammar and vocabulary so the
other 75% go into your paragraphs cool
and so this was mine you can see it here
word-for-word this would be well this
deserves to be an IELTS 9 this deserves
an IELTS 9 and that is that that's e 2
language calm cool thanks for watching
don't forget to click like subscribe and
leave a lovely comment even a smiley
face will do yes thanks very much for
coming I appreciate it and check out the
other videos we've got on offer and
check out a 2 language comm if you need
some serious health for your IELTS thank
you my name is Jay and I'll see you soon
whoops
you